---
title: Get your social fix through coding
author: Greg Hale
---

If you haven't registered for an account on [twitter](http://www.twitter.com) or [reddit](http://www.reddit.com), don't make one now. These sites have serious addictive power. For most of us on Facebook, you're in one of two camps. Either posting a comment is a rare event, and you refresh your post through the day checking whether your friends Like'd your idea or ignored it. *Or* you've posted enough that you desensitized to the feedback you could get on any one comment. Either way, when you powerful draw of shouting into the void, you understand the power the void has over you as you listen for its response, whether it's cat pictures, politics or science policy.

Something I found surprising is that contributing open source code can feel exactly the same way. Maybe you're *not* on twitter, but you already have a pretty accurate idea of what sort of experience you would have there, given your experience on Facebook. But you might not have guessed that this is the feeling that come with a [Github](http://www.github.com) account. 

<$foldbox>
  <$foldboxTitle>GitWhat?</foldboxTitle>
  <$foldboxContent>[Github](http://www.github.com) is a website for storing your collections of source code under version control, on the surface. It provides tools that make it easy to copy versions of your own code or other people's code, make experimental changes, and perhaps get those experimental changes integrated into the other people's copies.

When people first hear of open source, they often think, 'If everyone can change the code freely, what prevents random people from arbitrarily making bad changes?' The answer is: the code doesn't live in a single place where everyone has write-access. Instead everyone is free to copy and change the code, and for popular programs, there is one commonly known 'primary owner' of the code. He or she may put the code on their personal website, or on a shared website like [SourceForge](http://www.sourceforge.com).

That answers the first question, but it raises a host of others. *How do people know who the 'primary owner' of their program is (for programs that don't come in plastic-wrapped boxes)?* For a long time, you had to figure that out by knowing people, subscribing to mailing lists, or by judging how professional-looking the website is. If that sounds inefficient and error-prone, well... it is. *Ok. If code copies are owned by individuals, how does the owner benefit from the work of other people on those independent copies?* Would you believe, mostly through e-mail? It's not quite *that* barbaric - there are programs that will read the original source code and a new version, then generate a report of which lines have changed. And there are complementary programs that look at the original code and the change report, and update the old code via the change report. If a contributor thinks their contribution is useful and should be merged into the owner's code, the contributor e-mails the patch to the main owner, and the owner applies it to their code. This is largely how open source software was written before Github got popular (let's say, around 2010? TODO).

There aren't rules in basketball about man-to-man or zone coverage. There are rules about how much you're allowed to hold the ball while dribbling, how large the court is, etc - man-to-man and zone coverage are patterns that evolve around those rules. The same kind of relationship exits between the tools available to programmers and the patterns of collaboration that can evolve around those tools. And this is Github's main contribution. The Github website makes it easier to copy code, share changes, track bugs, track fixes and vote on the quality of code bases. Those tools are nice, but the more exciting part is the community that evolved around Github because of those tools.

  </foldboxContent>
</foldbox>

The [Github](http://www.github.com) website use to run with the banner "Social Coding"[1], which I found a little strange when getting started, especially since there was no wall of comments... *Um, what kind of socializing is going on here exactly?* We have a hard time thinking about socializing without talking. At first. I don't know what mimes do at mime conventions, but I like to imagine that they mime at each other. Juggers at juggling conventions socially jugglers. Coders - when they get together on the interweb - they code.

Is that social? Very much so. So much so that a lot of Github users probably don't even see a need to point it out. But a different set of Github users probably haven't even thought of it as a social thing themselves. For a while I was in that latter camp, because I wasn't social on Github, I just kept a version-controlled code repository for my work. And looked at other code repositories.

But as soon as you copy someone else's repository, make a change, and submit your change to them, that's when you see just how social open source coding can be. The first thing that happens is often that the maintainer whose code you copied will reach out, say 'thanks for the changes' and find out a little bit about you. Just like an older scientist who wants to feel like the current generation of grad students still recognize his work, an open source coder wants her library to be relevant. When you use her code, you provide her with a shot of dopamine. If her code is so important to you that you spend a little bit of your time adding a function or improving the README, you give her a big shot of dopamine.

And depending on your personality - if you're the type that checks your own facebook post more than a couple times times to see whether anyone wrote back or clicked some kind of buttons about you, you'll find the same kind of social exhileration from trying to get your changes merged back into the project you copied. There is a real risk of rejection if you did some work you're proud of but the maintainer doesn't like it. Or there can be a huge sense of relief when you transition from being a passive user or admirer of some code to being one of the contributors. It's not just cat pictures that people are evaluating, its your craft and your intellectual coherence. What a rush!

There are emotional roller-coasters to ride in science. There are commonly agreed upon levels of respect associated with your reputation as you publish papers and give talks. But I think this is a different kind of feeling than what you get from collaborating on code. Collaboration in science is a closer feeling, but it's still not the same. In science what we call collaboration is more of an awkward dance of negotiating non-overlapping sub-tasks sets so that noone feels like they might get replaced. If you've had a really tight collaboration that *isn't* like that - where you and your partner have very similar skill sets and you team up not necessarily because different sorts of things need to get done, but because the problem is huge and really does just require more brains, then this may be closer to the social coding collaboration feeling I'm talking about.


